---
title: Friday's menu
---

> This page is a rough guide. The commands are not meant to be copied/pasted and **will** require some editing and missing parameters.

## VisiData

Yesterday we introduced [visidata](https://www.visidata.org/), a command line tool to interactively explore tabular data.

Try it with the following commands:

```bash
conda activate  /shared/team/conda/telatin.mmb-dtp/utils

# Explore this table
vd /shared/team/week5/all-assemblies/SRX5707377/single-sample/recluster_bins_info.tsv
# Make the "frequency" plot for the bins in this table
vd /shared/team/week5/all-assemblies/SRX5707377/single-sample/contig_bins.tsv
```

* Use the arrow keys to move around
* Try the menus
* `shift+f` to make a frequency plot
* `_` to enlarge a column
* Press `q` to quit
  
## CheckM (and CheckM2)

Yesterday you ran `checkm lineage_wf` on your dataset.

Have a look at the output files.

An example directory is here `/shared/team/week5/all-assemblies/SRX5707377/single-sample/checkm_bins`.


## BUSCO and MultiQC

MultiQC also supports BUSCO and - if you didn't do it yesterday - you can run it now
on the output folder with all your BUSCO summaries.

:bulb: Ask Jade to check her report if you want to see how it looks like

---

## :tree: Assigning taxonomy

There are two valid pipelines to assign taxonomy to metagenome bins:

* [gtdbtk](https://github.com/Ecogenomics/GTDBTk): will place your bin in the GTDB tree
* [Camitax](https://github.com/CAMI-challenge/CAMITAX): will annotate your bin with NCBI taxonomy

Camitax requires an old version of Nextflow and we will skip it.

Gtdbtk on the other hand requires lots of ram and it might not end on our notebook, but it should at least spit the taxonomy of the archea. 

:bulb: run it on two or three bins, selecting the ones that you think are good quality.

```bash
# Activate the environment
conda activate /shared/team/conda/telatin.mmb-dtp/gtdbtk-2.1.1
```

Now check the docs to run the [classify wf](https://ecogenomics.github.io/GTDBTk/commands/classify_wf.html).

:bulb: If the program asks for the path to the database, you can find it here: `/shared/team/db/release214/`.

:clock1: This will take a while, so you can run it in a separate tab and check the results later.

---

*to be continued*