---
title: Assembly
---


## What is this about

* **Metagenomics Assembly**: Metagenomics assembly is a computational process used in genomics to piece together the genetic information from a complex mixture of microorganisms (like bacteria and viruses) found in a sample. It's like solving a jigsaw puzzle with many pieces where each piece represents a tiny part of the genetic code of various organisms in the sample.

* **Single Sample Assembly**: In single sample assembly, you analyze and assemble the genetic material from one sample at a time. It's like working on one puzzle at a time, focusing on the genetic information in a single biological sample.

* **Coassembly**: In coassembly, you combine genetic material from multiple samples (often from different sources or environments) into a single assembly. It's like mixing puzzle pieces from different puzzles together and trying to solve them as one big puzzle. Coassembly helps to understand the genetic diversity and interactions between microorganisms in different ecosystems.

## Common tools

* **MEGAHIT**: MEGAHIT is a single-sample assembler for large and complex metagenomics NGS reads, such as soil. It makes use of succinct de Bruijn graph, which allows it to assemble larger and more complex metagenomics datasets compared to other assemblers. [MEGAHIT on GitHub](https://github.com/voutcn/megahit)
* **MetaSPAdes**: MetaSPAdes is a single-sample assembler for metagenomic data. It is based on SPAdes, an assembler for single-cell and standard (multicell) bacterial genomes. [MetaSPAdes on GitHub](https://github.com/ablab/spades#readme)

:bulb: MegaHit is fast and can be used for large datasets without requiring too much memory.

## How to run MegaHit

:pencil: Create a new environment for MegaHit, and activate it

```bash
megahit -1 SRX5707173_1.subsample.fastq.gz -2 SRX5707173_2.subsample.fastq.gz -o SRX5707173 -t 4
```

The output will be in the `SRX5707173` folder, containing the following files:

* `final.contigs.fa`: the assembled contigs in FASTA format
* `intermediate_contigs`: a folder containing intermediate contigs (can be removed)
* `megahit.log`: a log file with information about the execution of the program
* `opts.json`: a file with the parameters used for the assembly

## Your task

1. Choose a dataset
2. Subsample the reads to 1,000,000 (why not using fastp, to select for quality?)
3. Perform the *de novo* assembly with MegaHit
4. Evaluate the assembly metrics