---
layout: page 
---

# Introduction to MLST as it applies to _E. coli_
Multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) is a molecular typing method used to characterize bacterial strains, including _E. coli_. It involves sequencing multiple housekeeping genes and assigning unique allele numbers to variations in these genes. By comparing the allelic profiles, known as sequence types (STs), it becomes possible to infer the genetic relatedness and population structure of _E. coli_ isolates. MLST has been instrumental in understanding the epidemiology, transmission dynamics, and evolution of _E. coli_ strains, aiding in outbreak investigations and surveillance efforts. It provides a standardized and reproducible approach for comparing and sharing data across laboratories and has been widely adopted in _E. coli_ research. There are at least three MLST schemes for E. coli, from [Wirth et al](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05172.x), [Jaureguy et al](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-9-560) and [Qi et al](http://shigatox.net/ecmlst/cgi-bin/index). The designations commonly encountered like ST131 or ST95 or ST10 are defined in the [Wirth et al](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05172.x) scheme.

Below is a reading list of key publications to help understand MLST (in general) and how it applies to _E. coli_. A BibTex file cataloguing of all the publications below is [available here](/bibtex/ecolimlst.bib). The short summaries of each paper were generated by ChatGPT4.

## On typing methods in general

- **Typing methods based on whole genome sequencing data**

  Uelze L, Grützke J, Borowiak M, Hammerl JA, Juraschek K, Deneke C, et al. One Health Outlook. 2020;2: 3. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42522-020-0010-1

  This paper highlights the importance of whole genome sequencing (WGS) in investigating foodborne pathogens. WGS enables detailed genetic analysis, aiding in disease outbreak investigations and risk characterization models. Bioinformatics tools are essential for analyzing WGS data, but standardization of typing tools is needed for data comparison across laboratories and establishing a global surveillance system.

- **Overview of molecular typing methods for outbreak detection and epidemiological surveillance**

  Sabat AJ, Budimir A, Nashev D, Sá-Leão R, van Dijl JM, Laurent F, et al. Eurosurveillance. 2013;18. https://doi.org/10.2807/ese.18.04.20380-en

  This paper discusses the significance of typing methods for differentiating bacterial isolates within a species. It highlights the limitations of traditional methods and the benefits of molecular approaches in improving surveillance and outbreak detection. The text also explores the feasibility of using whole genome sequencing technology and reviews various typing methods for epidemiological purposes.

## On Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) and _E. coli_ MLST schemes

- **Multilocus sequence typing: A portable approach to the identification of clones within populations of pathogenic microorganisms**

  Maiden MCJ, Bygraves JA, Feil E, Morelli G, Russell JE, Urwin R, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998;95: 3140–3145. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.6.3140

  This paper introduces multilocus sequence typing (MLST) as a portable and effective method for characterizing pathogenic microorganisms. The study specifically focuses on _Neisseria meningitidis_, determining allele sequences of housekeeping genes and constructing dendrograms to identify clonal groupings. The results demonstrate that MLST, utilizing a subset of six gene fragments, reliably identifies major meningococcal lineages associated with invasive disease. The paper highlights the advantage of MLST's portability and proposes its application to various bacterial species for global epidemiology through a shared database on the internet.

- **Sex and virulence in _Escherichia coli_: an evolutionary perspective**

  Wirth T, Falush D, Lan R, Colles F, Mensa P, Wieler LH, et al. Mol Microbiol. 2006;60: 1136–1151. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05172.x

  _This paper describes one of the MLST schemes for E. coli_. This paper also explores the evolutionary pathways of pathogenic _Escherichia coli_ (_E. coli_) by analyzing a global collection of isolates using multilocus sequence typing. It reveals that specific pathogen types have independently emerged in different lineages, with accelerated rates of evolution and frequent genomic alterations. The evolution of virulence is linked to increased rates of homologous recombination, highlighting the role of bacterial sex, and suggests episodic selection for strains capable of evading the host immune response.

- **Population structure and evolutionary dynamics of pathogenic bacteria**

  Smith JM, Feil EJ, Smith NH. Bioessays. 2000;22: 1115–1122. [https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-1878(200012)22:12<1115::AID-BIES9>3.0.CO;2-R](https://tinyurl.com/3mmnpt4p)

  This paper discusses the significance of recombination in bacterial populations using multilocus sequence typing (MLST). It confirms the existence of clones and high rates of recombination in several bacterial pathogens, highlighting the implications for population structure, virulence, antibiotic resistance, and genetically modified organisms.

- **Comparative analysis of core genome MLST and SNP typing within a European Salmonella serovar Enteritidis outbreak**

  Pearce ME, Alikhan N-F, Dallman TJ, Zhou Z, Grant K, Maiden MCJ. International Journal of Food Microbiology. 2018;274: 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.02.023

  This paper evaluates a core genome multilocus typing (cgMLST) scheme for Salmonella enterica isolates in a European outbreak. The scheme provides high-resolution typing, congruent with SNP-based and epidemiological analyses. It confirms the genetic diversity predating the outbreak, demonstrates scalability, and enables comparative analysis of Salmonella outbreaks across laboratories and jurisdictions.

- **PubMLST database - Multi-Locus Sequence Typing**

  https://pubmlst.org/multilocus-sequence-typing

  PubMLST database, which hosts many MLST schemes. Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) is a method for characterizing bacterial isolates based on the sequences of multiple house-keeping genes. Each isolate is assigned a unique allelic profile or sequence type (ST) based on the alleles at seven loci. MLST allows for unambiguous and direct comparison of isolates using DNA sequencing, enabling precise characterization and comparison of billions of distinct genotypes. MLST's advantages include unambiguous sequence data, easy comparison via centralized databases, and the ability to characterize isolates from clinical material even without culturing them.

- **Microbinfie podcast - Early days of MLST**

  https://soundcloud.com/microbinfie/early-days-of-mlst

  Microbinfie podcast episode. Ed Feil, a professor of bacterial evolution, and Natacha Couto, a data scientist, discuss multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) in bacterial population genetics. MLST assigns strain identities based on partial sequences and enables comparison of epidemiological databases. While MLST has limitations, it remains widely used, and the Eburst program offers improved visualization. The concept of clonality in bacterial species is explored, and the enduring legacy of MLST's nomenclature for lineages or clones is acknowledged. The discussion emphasizes the need for continued research in bacterial population genetics.

- **Phylogenetic and genomic diversity of human bacteremic _Escherichia coli_ strains**

  Jaureguy F, Landraud L, Passet V, Diancourt L, Frapy E, Guigon G, et al. BMC Genomics. 2008;9: 560. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-9-560

  _This paper describes one of the MLST schemes for E. coli_. This paper also investigates the clonal diversity of bacteremic _Escherichia coli_ strains and their association with genomic content and clinical features. The study reveals that bacteremic _E. coli_ isolates are highly diverse and distributed across different phylogenetic lineages. Certain clonal complexes are associated with urinary origin, but no specific complexes are linked to severe sepsis or unfavorable outcomes. Comparative genomic hybridization analysis identifies genomic characteristics associated with different clonal complexes.

- **EcMLST: an Online Database for Multi Locus Sequence Typing of Pathogenic _Escherichia coli_**

  http://shigatox.net/ecmlst/cgi-bin/index

  _This resource describes one of the MLST schemes for E. coli_. EcMLST is a database system for multilocus sequence typing (MLST) of pathogenic _Escherichia coli_. An online database and typing system for MultiLocus Sequence Typing of pathogenic _Escherichia coli_. It provides a portable and accurate method for characterizing _E. coli_ isolates, allowing researchers and public health laboratories to access nucleotide sequence data and allelic profiles for epidemiology and evolutionary studies.

## On _E. coli_ population structure

- **The population genetics of commensal _Escherichia coli_**

  Tenaillon O, Skurnik D, Picard B, Denamur E. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2010;8: 207–217. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2298

  This paper discusses the ecological and evolutionary factors shaping the population structure of commensal and pathogenic _Escherichia coli_. It explores the clonal nature of _E. coli_, the role of whole-genome sequencing in understanding its phylogenetic history, and the relationships between commensalism, virulence, and antibiotic resistance. The paper also highlights the potential of next-generation sequencing and metagenomics for further research.

- **A comprehensive and high-quality collection of Escherichia coli genomes and their genes**

  Horesh G, Blackwell GA, Tonkin-Hill G, Corander J, Heinz E, Thomson NR. Microbial Genomics. 2021;7. https://doi.org/10.1099/mgen.0.000499

  This paper discusses the compilation and curation of a comprehensive dataset of over 10,000 _Escherichia coli_ and _Shigella_ genomes. It highlights the need for a better understanding of the genetic diversity of _E. coli_ and its implications for studying biological differences and gene distribution within the population.

- **The EnteroBase user's guide, with case studies on _Salmonella_ transmissions, _Yersinia pestis_ phylogeny, and _Escherichia_ core genomic diversity**

  Zhou Z, Alikhan N-F, Mohamed K, Fan Y, the Agama Study Group, Achtman M. Genome Res. 2020;30: 138–152. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.251678.119

  This paper introduces EnteroBase, a software environment that utilizes genomics data to identify population structures within bacterial genera. It showcases its capabilities through case studies involving _Salmonella_, _Yersinia_, and _Escherichia_, demonstrating its ability to analyze transmission patterns, track microevolution, and provide a global overview of genomic diversity. See Case study 3, which explores the genetic diversity and population structure of _Escherichia coli_ using core genome multilocus sequence typing (cgMLST) and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis. It demonstrates the presence of distinct populations and clustering patterns within _E. coli_ and other _Escherichia_ species, providing valuable insights into their genetic relationships and diversity.

## On _E. coli_ phylogroups

- **Rapid and Simple Determination of the _Escherichia coli_ Phylogenetic Group**

  Clermont O, Bonacorsi S, Bingen E. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2000;66: 4555–4558. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.66.10.4555-4558.2000

  This paper presents a fast and simple technique for determining the phylogenetic groups of _Escherichia coli_ using triplex PCR. The method, tested on 230 strains, shows high correlation with complex and time-consuming reference methods, offering a more efficient approach for phylogenetic analysis of _E. coli_.

- **The Clermont _Escherichia coli_ phylo-typing method revisited: improvement of specificity and detection of new phylo-groups: A new _E. coli_ phylo-typing method**

  Clermont O, Christenson JK, Denamur E, Gordon DM. Environmental Microbiology Reports. 2013;5: 58–65. https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-2229.12019

  This paper describes a new PCR-based method for assigning _Escherichia coli_ isolates to one of eight phylo-groups, including the identification of isolates belonging to other cryptic clades. The method is validated and applied to human faecal isolates, revealing the prevalence of newly described phylo-groups and clades in the _E. coli_ population.

## On bioinformatics software for MLST and _E. coli_ phylotyping

- **Easy phylotyping of _Escherichia coli_ via the EzClermont web app and command-line tool**

  Waters NR, Abram F, Brennan F, Holmes A, Pritchard L. Access Microbiology. 2020;2. https://doi.org/10.1099/acmi.0.000143

  This paper introduces EzClermont, an _in silico_ tool for phylotyping _Escherichia coli_ based on the Clermont PCR method. The tool enables easy application of the phylotyping scheme to whole-genome assemblies and is evaluated against phylogenomic classifications, providing a web app and command-line tool for classification.

- **ClermonTyping: an easy-to-use and accurate _in silico_ method for _Escherichia_ genus strain phylotyping**

  Beghain J, Bridier-Nahmias A, Le Nagard H, Denamur E, Clermont O. Microbial Genomics. 2018;4. https://doi.org/10.1099/mgen.0.000192

  This paper introduces the ClermonTyping method and its web-interface, the ClermonTyper, which enables the identification of _Escherichia_ species, _E. coli_ phylogroups, and cryptic _Escherichia_ clades from whole genome sequences. The _in silico_ approach demonstrates high concordance with in vitro PCR assays, providing a valuable resource for strain characterization in epidemiological studies.

- **mlst (Torstyverse)**

  https://github.com/tseemann/mlst

  Scan contig files against traditional PubMLST typing schemes